 
ETYMOLOGY.

(Supplied by a Late Consumptive Usher to a Grammar
School)

The pale Usher—threadbare in coat, heart, body, and
brain; I see him now. He was ever dusting his old lexicons
and grammars, with a queer handkerchief, mockingly em-
bellished with all the gay flags of all the known nations of
the world. He loved to dust his old grammars; it somehow
mildly reminded him of his mortality.

‘While you take in hand to school others, and to teach them
by what name a whale-fish is to be called in our tongue
leaving out, through ignorance, the letter H, which almost
alone maketh the signification of the word, you deliver that
which is not true.’ —HACKLUYT

‘WHALE. ... Sw. and Dan. HVAL. This animal is named from
roundness or rolling; for in Dan. HVALT is arched or vaulted.’
—WEBSTER’S DICTIONARY

‘WHALE. ... It is more immediately from the Dut. and

Ger. WALLEN; A.S. WALW-IAN, to roll, to wallow.’ —
RICHARDSON’S DICTIONARY

KETOS, GREEK.

2 Mosy Dick
CETUS, LATIN.

WHOEL, ANGLO-SAXON.
HVALT, DANISH.

WAL, DUTCH.

HWAL, SWEDISH.

WHALE, ICELANDIC.
WHALE, ENGLISH.
BALEINE, FRENCH.
BALLENA, SPANISH.
PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE, FEGEE.
PEKEE-NUEE-NUEE, ERROMANGOAN.

EXTRACTS (Supplied by a Sub-Sub-Librarian).

It will be seen that this mere painstaking burrower and
grub-worm of a poor devil of a Sub-Sub appears to have
gone through the long Vaticans and street-stalls of the earth,
picking up whatever random allusions to whales he could
anyways find in any book whatsoever, sacred or profane.
Therefore you must not, in every case at least, take the
higgledy-piggledy whale statements, however authentic,

in these extracts, for veritable gospel cetology. Far from it.
As touching the ancient authors generally, as well as the
poets here appearing, these extracts are solely valuable or
entertaining, as affording a glancing bird’s eye view of what
has been promiscuously said, thought, fancied, and sung of
Leviathan, by many nations and generations, including our
own.

FREE EBOOKS AT PLANET EBOOK.COM
So fare thee well, poor devil of a Sub-Sub, whose commentator
Iam. Thou belongest to that hopeless, sallow tribe which

no wine of this world will ever warm; and for whom even

Pale Sherry would be too rosy-strong; but with whom one
sometimes loves to sit, and feel poor-devilish, too; and grow
convivial upon tears; and say to them bluntly, with full

eyes and empty glasses, and in not altogether unpleasant
sadness—Give it up, Sub-Subs! For by how much the more
pains ye take to please the world, by so much the more shall ye
for ever go thankless! Would that I could clear out Hampton
Court and the Tuileries for ye! But gulp down your tears

and hie aloft to the royal-mast with your hearts; for your
friends who have gone before are clearing out the seven-
storied heavens, and making refugees of long-pampered
Gabriel, Michael, and Raphael, against your coming. Here

ye strike but splintered hearts together—there, ye shall strike
unsplinterable glasses!

EXTRACTS.
‘And God created great whales.’ —GENESIS.

‘Leviathan maketh a path to shine after him; One would think
the deep to be hoary.’ —JOB.

‘Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah,
—JONAH.

“There go the ships; there is that Leviathan whom thou hast

Mosy Dick
made to play therein.’ —PSALMS.

‘In that day, the Lord with his sore, and great, and strong
sword, shall punish Leviathan the piercing serpent, even
Leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon
that is in the sea.” —ISAIAH

‘And what thing soever besides cometh within the chaos of
this monster’s mouth, be it beast, boat, or stone, down it goes
all incontinently that foul great swallow of his, and perisheth
in the bottomless gulf of his paunch.’ —HOLLAND’S
PLUTARCH’S MORALS.

“The Indian Sea breedeth the most and the biggest fishes

that are: among which the Whales and Whirlpooles called
Balaene, take up as much in length as four acres or arpens of
land.’ —HOLLAND’S PLINY.

‘Scarcely had we proceeded two days on the sea, when about
sunrise a great many Whales and other monsters of the sea,
appeared. Among the former, one was of a most monstrous
size. ... This came towards us, open-mouthed, raising the
waves on all sides, and beating the sea before him into a
foam.’ —TOOKE’S LUCIAN. ‘THE TRUE HISTORY.’

‘He visited this country also with a view of catching horse-
whales, which had bones of very great value for their teeth, of
which he brought some to the king. ... The best whales were
catched in his own country, of which some were forty-eight,

FREE EBOOKS AT PLANET EBOOK.COM 5
